docs(flutter_bloc): Extension Methods documentation (#3168)
felangel/bloc: docs/flutterbloccoreconcepts.md

Now when instantiating a bloc, we can access the instance of a repository via `context.read` and inject the repository into the bloc via constructor.

[flutter_weather_link]: https://github.com/felangel/bloc/blob/master/examples/flutter_weather

## Extension Methods

> Importing the `flutter_bloc` package includes different extension methods and this section aims to describe what and how these should be used. This type of methods, included in Dart 2.7, allow to add functionalities to existing classes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Importing the `flutter_bloc` package includes different extension methods and this section aims to describe what they do and how they should be used. This type of method, included since Dart 2.7, allows adding functionalities to existing classes.
```

?> Check out the official [Dart Documentation](https://dart.dev/guides/language/extension-methods) for more information about extension methods.

### Provider

> `flutter_bloc` besides depending on `flutter` also depends on the [provider](https://pub.dev/packages/provider) package. Provider aims to wrap `InheritedWidget` and simplify its usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`flutter_bloc` besides depending on `flutter` also depends on the [provider](https://pub.dev/packages/provider) package. Provider wraps `InheritedWidget` and simplifies its usage.
```

?> Check out the official [Flutter Documentation](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/InheritedWidget-class.html) to learn more about `InheritedWidget`.

> In essence, `BlocProvider`, `MultiBlocProvider`, `RepositoryProvider` and `MultiRepositoryProvider` widgets are including an `InheritedProvider` to the widget tree.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In essence; `BlocProvider`, `MultiBlocProvider`, `RepositoryProvider` and `MultiRepositoryProvider` widgets are injecting one or more `InheritedProviders` to the widget tree.
```

> In addition, `flutter_bloc` exports `ReadContext`, `WatchContext` and `SelectContext`, all extensions from `package:provider`. This means that importing `package:flutter_bloc` exposes these extensions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, `flutter_bloc` exports `ReadContext`, `WatchContext` and `SelectContext`, all extension methods from `package:provider`. This means that importing `package:flutter_bloc` exposes these extensions.
```

?> Check out [Provider's pub page](https://pub.dev/packages/provider) to learn more about `Provider`.

### ReadContext

> `package:provider` creates an extension, named `ReadContext` on `BuildContext` that defines the `read<T>()` method. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`package:provider` creates an extension named `ReadContext` on `BuildContext` that defines the `read<T>()` method. 
```

> `context.read<T>()` provides the closest `T` provided in the widget tree. However, `context.read<T>()` does not listen to `T`. In other words, if the provided `Object` of type `T` changes `read` will not trigger a rebuild.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`context.read<T>()` provides the closest `T` provided in the widget tree. However, `context.read<T>()` does not listen to `T`. In other words, if the provided `Object` of type `T` changes, `read` will not trigger a rebuild.
```

> In essence, `Provider` is a wrapper over `InheritedWidget`. The convention for `InheritedWidget`s is to expose a `static` method named `of`. This method usually searches the widget tree for the nearest `InheritedWidget` which matches a given `Type`. This is exactly what `BlocProvider.of<T>(context)` and `context.read<T>()` do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The convention for `InheritedWidgets` is to expose a `static` method named `of`. This method usually searches the widget tree via `BuildContext` for the nearest `InheritedWidget` which matches a given `Type`. This is exactly what `BlocProvider.of<T>(context)` and `context.read<T>()` do.
```

?> `BlocProvider.of<T>(context)` and `context.read<T>()` are equivalent.

#### How to use `context.read<T>`?

> Both, `BlocProvider.of<T>(context)` and `context.read<T>()` are equally valid. Is up to the developer to go with the most convenient method. Although, it is preferred to be consistent with the given choice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both, `BlocProvider.of<T>(context)` and `context.read<T>()` are equally valid. It is up to the developer to go with the most convenient method. Although, it is preferred to be consistent with the given choice.
```

**DO** use `context.read<T>()` to add events.

```dart
context.read<CounterBloc>().add(CounterIncrementPressed()),
```

It is common to use these methods to retrieve a bloc in order to add events.
However, it is preferred to use, where appropriate, a `BlocBuilder`, `BlocSelector`, `BlocListener` or `BlocConsumer` to access the `state` of a bloc instead of `context.read<FooBloc>().state`.

**AVOID** using `context.read<T>()` to retrieve state.

```dart
@override
Widget build(BuildContext context) {
  final state = context.bloc<MyBloc>().state;
  return Text('$state');
}
```

The above usage is error prone because the `Text` widget will not be rebuilt if the state of the bloc changes. In this scenario, either a `BlocBuilder` or `context.watch` should be used.

### WatchContext

`package:provider` creates an extension, named `WatchContext` on `BuildContext` that defines the `watch<T>()` method. 

> Not only `context.watch<T>()` provides the closest `T` provided in the widget tree. But it also listens to changes on `T`, unlike `context.read<T>()`. This means that, if the provided `Object` of type `T` changes, `watch` will trigger a rebuild. Thus, this method is only accessible inside a `StatelessWidget`'s or `State`'s `build` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not only `context.watch<T>()` provides the closest `T` provided in the widget tree, it also listens to changes on `T`, unlike `context.read<T>()`. This means that, if the provided `Object` of type `T` changes, `watch` will trigger a rebuild. Thus, this method is only accessible inside a `StatelessWidget`'s or `State`'s `build` method.
```

**PREFER** using `BlocBuilder` instead of `context.watch<T>()`.

```dart
BlocBuilder<BlocA, BlocAState>(
  builder: (context, state) {
    // return widget here based on BlocA's state
  }
)
```
It is unusual to see `context.watch<T>()`. The use of `BlocBuilder` achieves equivalent functionality. However, the absence of a `MultiBlocBuilder` suggests that the following can be valid:

```dart
Builder(
  builder: (context) {
    final stateA = context.watch<BlocA>().state;
    final stateB = context.watch<BlocB>().state;
    final stateC = context.watch<BlocC>().state;

    // return a Widget which depends on the state of BlocA, BlocB, and BlocC
  }
);
```

!> Using `context.watch` at the root of the `build` method will result in the entire widget being rebuilt when the bloc state changes. If the entire widget does not need to be rebuilt, either use `BlocBuilder` to wrap the parts that should rebuild, or use a `Builder` with `context.watch` to scope the rebuilds, or decompose the widget into smaller widgets.

### SelectContext

`package:provider` creates an extension, named `SelectContext` on `BuildContext` that defines the `select<T, R>(R function(T value))` method. 

> As in  `context.watch<T>()`, `context.select<T, R>(R function(T value))` provides the closest `T` provided in the widget tree. And also listens to changes on `T`, unlike `context.read<T>()`. However, the `select` method allows to be more selective, and avoid unnecessary rebuilds by specifying which property should be listened.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As in  `context.watch<T>()`, `context.select<T, R>(R function(T value))` provides the closest `T` provided in the widget tree. And also listens to changes on `T`, unlike `context.read<T>()`. However, the `select` method allows you to be more selective, and avoid unnecessary rebuilds by specifying which property should be listened to.
```

```dart
Widget build(BuildContext context) {
  final name = context.select((Unicorn unicorn) => unicorn.name);
  return Text(name);
}
```

The above, will only rebuild the widget when the property `name` of `Unicorn` changes value. It will not rebuild if some other property of `Unicorn` changes.

##### How to use `context.select<T, R>`?

Whenever it is required to only listen to specific changes of a bloc state, it is preferred to be selective and avoid unnecessary rebuilds.

```dart

> 

Reviewer: just a quick example we can use, feel free to modify it
```suggestion
class Input extends StatelessWidget {
  const Input({Key? key}) : super(key: key);

  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return BlocSelector<BlocA, BlocAState, String>(
      selector: (state) => state.input,
      builder: (context, state) {
        return TextField(
          onChanged: (value) => context.read<BlocA>().add(InputChanged(value)),
          decoration: InputDecoration(
            errorText: state.length < 1 ? 'input is too short' : null,
          ),
        );
      },
    );
  }
}
```

Now when instantiating a bloc, we can access the instance of a repository via `context.read` and inject the repository into the bloc via constructor.

[flutter_weather_link]: https://github.com/felangel/bloc/blob/master/examples/flutter_weather

## Extension Methods

> Importing the `flutter_bloc` package includes different extension methods and this section aims to describe what they do and how they should be used. This type of method, included since Dart 2.7, allows adding functionalities to existing classes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Extension methods](https://dart.dev/guides/language/extension-methods), introduced in Dart 2.7, are a way to add functionality to existing libraries. In this section, we'll take a look at extension methods included in `package:flutter_bloc` and how they can be used.
```

> ?> Check out the official [Dart Documentation](https://dart.dev/guides/language/extension-methods) for more information about extension methods.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

If we link above we probably don't need this

### Provider

> `flutter_bloc` besides depending on `flutter` also depends on the [provider](https://pub.dev/packages/provider) package. Provider wraps `InheritedWidget` and simplifies its usage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`flutter_bloc` has a dependency on [package:provider](https://pub.dev/packages/provider) which simplifies the usage of [`InheritedWidget`](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/InheritedWidget-class.html).
```

> ?> Check out the official [Flutter Documentation](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/InheritedWidget-class.html) to learn more about `InheritedWidget`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

We can probably remove if we link above.

> In essence; `BlocProvider`, `MultiBlocProvider`, `RepositoryProvider` and `MultiRepositoryProvider` widgets are injecting one or more `InheritedProviders` to the widget tree.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Internally, `package:flutter_bloc` uses `package:provider` in the implementations of: `BlocProvider`, `MultiBlocProvider`, `RepositoryProvider` and `MultiRepositoryProvider` widgets. Ultimately, each of these widgets uses `Provider` (`InheritedWidget`) to provide instances of various objects to the widget tree.
```

In addition, `flutter_bloc` exports `ReadContext`, `WatchContext` and `SelectContext`, all extension methods from `package:provider`. This means that importing `package:flutter_bloc` exposes these extensions.

?> Check out [Provider's pub page](https://pub.dev/packages/provider) to learn more about `Provider`.

### ReadContext

> `package:provider` creates an extension named `ReadContext` on `BuildContext` that defines the `read<T>()` method. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

`context.read<T>()` provides the closest `T` provided in the widget tree. However, `context.read<T>()` does not listen to `T`. In other words, if the provided `Object` of type `T` changes, `read` will not trigger a rebuild.

The convention for `InheritedWidgets` is to expose a `static` method named `of`. This method usually searches the widget tree via `BuildContext` for the nearest `InheritedWidget` which matches a given `Type`. This is exactly what `BlocProvider.of<T>(context)` and `context.read<T>()` do.

?> `BlocProvider.of<T>(context)` and `context.read<T>()` are equivalent.

#### How to use `context.read<T>`?

> Both, `BlocProvider.of<T>(context)` and `context.read<T>()` are equally valid. It is up to the developer to go with the most convenient method. Although, it is preferred to be consistent with the given choice.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both, `BlocProvider.of<T>(context)` and `context.read<T>()` are functionally equivalent. It is up to the developer to go with the most convenient method. Although, it is preferred to be consistent with the given choice.
```

Author: Great suggestion! I really prefer "functionality equivalent" over "equally valid".

**DO** use `context.read<T>()` to add events.

```dart
context.read<CounterBloc>().add(CounterIncrementPressed()),
```

It is common to use these methods to retrieve a bloc in order to add events.
However, it is preferred to use, where appropriate, a `BlocBuilder`, `BlocSelector`, `BlocListener` or `BlocConsumer` to access the `state` of a bloc instead of `context.read<FooBloc>().state`.

**AVOID** using `context.read<T>()` to retrieve state.

```dart
@override
Widget build(BuildContext context) {
  final state = context.bloc<MyBloc>().state;
  return Text('$state');
}
```

The above usage is error prone because the `Text` widget will not be rebuilt if the state of the bloc changes. In this scenario, either a `BlocBuilder` or `context.watch` should be used.

### WatchContext

> `package:provider` creates an extension, named `WatchContext` on `BuildContext` that defines the `watch<T>()` method. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> Not only `context.watch<T>()` provides the closest `T` provided in the widget tree, it also listens to changes on `T`, unlike `context.read<T>()`. This means that, if the provided `Object` of type `T` changes, `watch` will trigger a rebuild. Thus, this method is only accessible inside a `StatelessWidget`'s or `State`'s `build` method.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Like `context.read<T>(), `context.watch<T>()` provides the closest `T` provided in the widget tree, however it also listens to changes on `T`. This means that, if the provided `Object` of type `T` changes, `watch` will trigger a rebuild. Thus, this method is only accessible inside a `StatelessWidget`'s or `State`'s `build` method.
```

?> `BlocProvider.of<T>(context, listen: true)` and `context.watch<T>()` are equivalent.

#### How to use `context.watch<T>`?

**PREFER** using `BlocBuilder` instead of `context.watch<T>()`.

```dart
BlocBuilder<BlocA, BlocAState>(
  builder: (context, state) {
    // return widget here based on BlocA's state
  }
)
```
It is unusual to see `context.watch<T>()`. The use of `BlocBuilder` achieves equivalent functionality. However, the absence of a `MultiBlocBuilder` suggests that the following can be valid:

```dart
Builder(
  builder: (context) {
    final stateA = context.watch<BlocA>().state;
    final stateB = context.watch<BlocB>().state;
    final stateC = context.watch<BlocC>().state;

    // return a Widget which depends on the state of BlocA, BlocB, and BlocC
  }
);
```

!> Using `context.watch` at the root of the `build` method will result in the entire widget being rebuilt when the bloc state changes. If the entire widget does not need to be rebuilt, either use `BlocBuilder` to wrap the parts that should rebuild, use a `Builder` with `context.watch` to scope the rebuilds, or decompose the widget into smaller widgets.

### SelectContext

> `package:provider` creates an extension, named `SelectContext` on `BuildContext` that defines the `select<T, R>(R function(T value))` method. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> As in  `context.watch<T>()`, `context.select<T, R>(R function(T value))` provides the closest `T` provided in the widget tree. And also listens to changes on `T`, unlike `context.read<T>()`. However, the `select` method allows you to be more selective, and avoid unnecessary rebuilds by specifying which property should be listened to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As with `context.watch<T>()`, `context.select<T, R>(R function(T value))` provides the closest `T` provided in the widget tree and also listens to changes on `T`. In addition, the `select` method allows you to be more selective, and avoid unnecessary rebuilds by specifying which state property should be accessed.
```

?> Check out the official [Flutter Documentation](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/InheritedWidget-class.html) to learn more about `InheritedWidget`.

#### ReadContext extension

##### What is `context.read<T>`?

`Provider` is a wrapper over `InheritedWidget`. The convention for `InheritedWidget`s is to expose a `static` method named `of`. This method usually searches the widget tree for the nearest `InheritedWidget` which matches a given `Type`. This is exactly what `BlocProvider.of<T>(context)` does.

Some developers consider `BlocProvider.of<T>(context)` too verbose and take advantage of *extension methods*. Thus, the provider package creates an extension on `BuildContext` (named `ReadContext`) that includes the `read<T>()` method.

It is important to note that `BlocProvider.of<T>(context)` and `context.read<T>` do not listen to `T`. In other words, if the provided `Object` changes `read` will not be called to update the value after this change.

?> `BlocProvider.of<T>(context)` and `context.read<T>` are equivalent.

> ##### How to use `context.read<T>`?

Reviewer: is this still in progress? if it is, I would change it to draft until it is ready for review so we can give a general opinion about it as is a documentation enhancement 👍
